---
ID: 599
type: concept
tags: 
 - gender studies
 - cultural studies
 - literary theory
---

[[Queer Theory]]

 A
[[post-structuralism]]
approach to the analysis, documenting, history, and understanding of
human sexuality. It is particularly (but not exclusively) interested in
forms of sexuality that fall outside (or are defined in opposition to)
the so-called heterosexual norm. It grew out of and exists alongside
[[Queer Studies]],
effectively functioning as the latter's forum for raising definitional
and ontological questions concerning what it means to be bisexual, gay,
lesbian, or straight. The work of [[Foucault, Michel]], particularly his
work on power and the history of sexuality, is generally credited as the
principal theoretical impetus. Foucault's work sought to find out both
how and why human sexuality came to be treated as an item of knowledge
and the cultural and political implications of the attempt to make it
knowable. In general, Foucault's work shows that power exerts itself by
creating regimes of inclusion and exclusion. The point that is often
missed by Foucault's readers is that it is the form of the binary itself
that primarily interests Foucault, not the content. In other words, it
is not the fact that straight is included and queer is excluded by a
given society that concerns Foucault, but rather the fact that the
elastic continuum of sexuality can be segmented so neatly despite the
obvious permeability of the key categories. In the wake of Foucault's
studies, there has proliferated an incredible array of works that affirm
the existence of regimes of inclusion and exclusion and show the myriad
ways its categories leak. The most prominent in this regard is Eve
Kosofsky Sedgwick's *Epistemology of the Closet* (1990), and [[Butler, Judith]]'s *Gender Trouble*
(1990).
**Further Reading:** I. Morland and A. Willox (eds.) *Queer Theory:
Readers in Cultural Criticism* (2004).
N. Sullivan *A Critical Introduction to Queer Theory* (2003).
