---
ID: 638
type: concept
tags: 
 - sociology
---

[[risk society]]
(*Risikogesellschaft*) German sociologist [[Beck, Ulrich]]'s term for the
present situation (which in Beck's view began to take shape in the
aftermath of World War II), which in his view is defined by the
expansion of uncontrollable risks, i.e. risks which have no
straightforward or direct cause and therefore no obvious or easy means
of attenuation (climate change is the best-known example of such a
risk). Beck is particularly concerned with new types of risk that have
arisen---or may arise in the future---as a consequence of human action.
The issue is not so much that the world has become inherently more
dangerous than it used to be, although that is in fact one of the
implications of Beck's thesis, but rather that the nature of the threats
we face now has changed---they have become, in Beck's terms,
'de-bounded' in spatial, temporal, and social terms: risks are no longer
bound by regional or even national boundaries, but are frequently global
in scope; risks may have long latency periods such that the actual cause
of particular threats may lie in the distant past or as is the case with
nuclear material may stay with us for thousands of years; and because of
these spatial and temporal unboundings it has become difficult to assign
responsibility in a legally relevant fashion. Although global in scope,
risks plainly do not affect everyone and every part of the world
equally---e.g. as catastrophic as Hurricane Katrina was for New Orleans
in 2005, it caused nowhere near as much misery as hurricanes routinely
cause in much poorer countries like Haiti, which lack the resources to
defend against natural disaster, and what damage it did cause was the
fault of failed human-made structures rather than nature. As the case of
Hurricane Katrina made abundantly clear, the real problem with respect
to risk is that decisions affecting the types of threat we face and the
possible responses that might be made to address them have become
'sub-political', consigned to the essentially unaccountable realms of
bureaucracy and business where the people most affected by these
decisions are unable to have any direct input.
**Further Reading:** U. Beck *Risikogesellschaft: Auf dem Weg in eine
andere Moderne* (1986), translated as *Risk Society: Towards a New
Modernity* (1992).
