---
ID: 640
type: concept
tags: 
 - literature
 - cultural studies
---

[[romance]]

 A literary genre
dating back to the early Middle Ages that has evolved considerably over
time. The term itself derives from the fact that the first examples were
written in the so-called Romance languages, that is to say, in the local
vernacular rather than Latin as most other books were at that time. Also
known as courtly tales, these stories were largely adventure and quest
narratives focusing on the lives of medieval kings and queens.
Thematically, most of these tales concentrate on chivalric issues to do
with courage, love, honour, manners, and fidelity, both to one's
betrothed, but also (and indeed more importantly) to one's realm. The
most studied examples of such texts are the tales of King Arthur, which
have known several permutations. The first modern novel, namely *Don Quixote* (1604) by Miguel de Cervantes, is a parody of courtly romances
that at once undermines the genre and at the same time frees it to
evolve in new directions. Romance today refers to what is essentially a
sub-genre of the novel whose thematic focus is love---Jane Austen's
*Pride and Prejudice* (1813) is often taken as the starting point for
this modulation of the romance genre, which extends all the way to the
popular romances of the variety Mills & Boon publish. This version of
the romance genre tends to be shorn of the more adventurous elements,
and told from the point of view of the female protagonist. But the
romance novel is not the only form in which the genre survives: it
continues too in the fantasy novel, such as J. R. R. Tolkien's 'Ring
Trilogy'.
**Further Reading:** B. Fuchs *Romance* (2004).
