---
ID: 9
type: concept
tags: 
 - cultural studies
 - media studies
---

[[actor network theory]]

 A
material-semiotic theory of social action. Developed by the sociologists
Bruno Latour, Michel Callon, and John Law at the Centre de Sociologie de
l'Innovation at the École Nationale Supérieure des Mines de Paris in the
early 1980s as a means of explaining the conditions for the emergence of
innovation. It is characterized by its treatment of people, things, and
ideas as [[actant]],
recognizing that all three are capable of initiating and sustaining an
action; it also emphasizes that actants are incapable of performing most
actions by themselves, but require the support of a network of other
actants; similarly, actants are needed to keep networks going. Perhaps
the most striking use of this type of thinking is Dutch architect Rem
Koolhaas' *Delirious New York* (1994), which, in apparent ignorance of
actor network theory, produced a striking account of the development of
New York which claimed just three things were crucial to its present-day
look: the laying out of the city grid, the invention of the elevator,
and the building code restrictions with regard to the casting of
shadows. Actor network theory is particularly useful for identifying the
critical components of a particular business enterprise or a whole
sector, but finds it difficult to deal with more open-ended institutions
such as [[culture]] and
[[society]].
