---
ID: 11
type: thinker
tags: 
 - critical theory
 - marxist criticism
---

[[Adorno, Theodor]] 
(1903--69)


German philosopher and key member of the [[Frankfurt School]]. A refined cultural
critic with an incredible range of interests, Adorno wrote influential
essays on music, literature, philosophy, sociology, and contemporary
mass culture. He is justly regarded as one of the great thinkers of the
twentieth century for the way his thought and his writing rose to meet
head-on the challenge posed to philosophy by one of the most tumultuous
centuries in history. His work responded to the rapid changes to culture
that [[modernism]] unleashed,
charting both its highs and lows; it also responded to the social
transformations occasioned by the evolutions of [[late capitalism]]; but most
importantly, it responded uncompromisingly and unsparingly to fascism.
He dared to say philosophy had failed humanity.
An only child, Adorno was born in Frankfurt am Main. Tutored by
[[Kracauer, Siegfried]], he
studied philosophy, psychology, and sociology at the Johann Wolfgang
Goethe University in Frankfurt. He then completed a doctorate on
[[neurosis]]'s
[[phenomenology]] at the
University of Frankfurt in 1924.
His initial attempt at producing a habilitation thesis, the passport to
professorial appointment in the German system, came unstuck at the hands
of the same thesis examiners who failed [[Benjamin, Walter]]. Unlike his
friend, Adorno was given a second chance and in 1931 he succeeded with a
dissertation on Kierkegaard. His tenure as a full professor in Germany
was to be short-lived.
When the Nazis came into power in 1933, they immediately cracked down on
what Jewish people were able to do and in 1934 Adorno's licence to teach
was revoked. He moved to Oxford, where he was advised to complete
another doctorate under the supervision of Gilbert Ryle so as to enable
him to have a career in Britain. But this proved unsatisfactory and in
1937 he accepted an invitation from [[Horkheimer, Max]] to join him in
New York, where he had re-established his Institute for Social Research
at Columbia University. While based in New York he also contributed to
the Princeton Radio Project directed by Austrian sociologist Paul
Lazarsfeld, which was interested in the ideological influence of radio.
In 1941, again at the instigation of Horkheimer, he relocated to Los
Angeles, where he joined a large expatriate community that included
Schoenberg, Brecht, and the Nobel Prize-winning author Thomas Mann, whom
he advised on musical matters (particularly on atonality and twelve-tone
music) for his anti-Nazi allegory *Doktor Faustus. Das Leben des
deutschen Tonsetzers Adrian Leverkühn erzählt von einem Freunde* (1947),
translated as *Doctor Faustus: The Life of the German Composer Adrian
Leverkühn, as Told by a Friend* (1948). He arrived in Los Angeles with a
completed manuscript of *Philosophie der neuen Musik* (1949), translated
as *Philosophy of Modern Music* (1973), in his suitcase. He shared this
with Horkheimer, who immediately warmed to its attack on the fragmentary
nature of contemporary life, and it confirmed their desire to work
together, which they did over the next couple of years, producing one of
the most important books of the period, *Dialektik der Aufklärung*
(1944), translated as *Dialectic of Enlightenment* (1972).
Written as it was by two exiles from the Holocaust, *Dialectic of
Enlightenment* does not have a particularly cheerful message, but it was
in consonance with the times. Two themes stood out in particular: first,
its critique of the media, or what it labelled the [[culture industry]]; second, its
critique of western rationality. Adorno and Horkheimer make the
essential point that rationality, by which they mean both science and
philosophy, had not prevented the genocide perpetrated against the Jews
of Europe; therefore, salvation for the future could not lie in that
direction. They did not necessarily reject outright the idea of
[[Enlightenment]], as many
have assumed, but they certainly called for its radical overhaul. In
particular, they wanted to disrupt the imperceptible transformation of
Enlightenment ideals into uncritically accepted myths. One such myth,
which they did reject outright, is the idea that history is synonymous
with progress.
The most well-known chapter in *Dialectic of Enlightenment* is the essay
on the 'Culture Industry', in which they argue that western culture has
deteriorated into an ensemble of commodities that can no longer offer
the critical or creative experience of art. This kind of culture is,
they argue, dehumanizing, and, more controversially, depoliticizing, by
which they meant it renders people politically passive and therefore
more susceptible to the appeal of authoritarian styles of politics such
as fascism. They coined the term 'instrumental reason' to describe this
new type of rationality which is concerned solely with ends, not means.
The mass media, they argue, has contributed to the problem by
disseminating works that are too easy, with the result that our critical
faculties have become enfeebled.
This anti-instrumentalist theme is made even more explicit in what is
undoubtedly Adorno's best-known philosophical work *Negative Dialektik*
(1966), translated as *Negative Dialectics* (1973), which famously
pronounced that a new categorical imperative has been imposed, namely to
arrange one's thoughts and actions so that Auschwitz will not be
repeated. It also contains the famous pronouncement that there can be no
poetry after Auschwitz, by which he seems to have meant that it is
literally impossible to arrange one's thoughts in an era in which the
accidental nature of fortune has been so brutally laid bare. Adorno
argued that there was no logical or automatic response one could be
expected to make with regard to the Holocaust, and to try to trade on it
for aesthetic or political purposes was thoroughly repugnant to him. He
also argued that any critique of fascism that was not also a critique of
capitalism was hollow. If *Negative Dialectics* is Adorno's most
well-known philosophical work, it is also his most damning of
philosophy, which above all disciplines, he seems to say, should have
offered better protection against the murderous seductions of Nazism.
Philosophy, he says, only lives on because it missed its moment to
realize itself.
Although his personal letters indicate that life as an exile in Santa
Monica was anything but unpleasant, Adorno's writings during his seven
years in America were far from sunny in disposition. Indeed, his next
book *Minima Moralia*, begun in 1942 but not published until 1951, was
later appended with the telling subtitle 'Reflexionen aus dem
beschädigten Leben' ('Reflections from a Damaged Life'). But, then, as a
German examining his home nation's collective guilt for the catastrophe
that had befallen Europe, there was very little to be cheerful about.
Composed of short aphorisms, *Minima Moralia* tries to explain both the
ideological appeal of Nazism and why Germany's defeat did not
necessarily spell the end of fascism. On publication, the book rapidly
became a bestseller and crossover critical success.
Despite his many misgivings about Germany, he leapt at the chance to
return there definitively in 1953 as Professor of Philosophy and
Sociology at the University of Frankfurt. He had made tentative steps in
this direction in 1949, but it took a couple of years to sort out a
proper position for him. In the intervening years he completed two
further works on mass media: a study of horoscopes (published in 2001 in
English as *The Stars down to Earth: And Other Essays on the Irrational
Culture*) and a study of what he called the pseudo-culture of television
(a collection of essays on this theme was published in 1991 in English
as *The Culture Industry*). But perhaps most importantly, he saw to
publication the great collective work of *The Authoritarian Personality*
(Adorno et al., 1950), which sought to dissect the very character of the
modern American.
Adorno's return to Germany brought with it some incredible highs, but it
saw some terrible lows as well. He officially took over the directorship
of the Institute for Social Research from Horkheimer, who retired in
1958, though in practice he had effectively been its director since the
Institute's return to Germany in 1950. He developed a powerful critique
of [[Heidegger, Martin]] (who
in spite of his war shame remained a hegemonic force in German
philosophy) in *Jargon der Eigentlichkeit: Zur deutschen Ideologie*
(1964), translated as *The Jargon of Authenticity* (1973). He tried to
bring together his multivarious thoughts on aesthetics, but was unable
to complete this project. Drafts in various stages of completion were
published posthumously as *Ästhetische Theorie* (1970), translated
(twice) as *Aesthetic Theory* (1984 and 1998). In this work Adorno
explored the invidious position of the artwork that critiqued society
from within a position of capture by the market.
In the late 1960s, Adorno was drawn into and in some respects became a
target of student activism. Dismayed by the state's authoritarian
response to the students' protests, Adorno was willing to express
solidarity with their anti-war position (he saw the Vietnam War as a
continuation of the state of terror he associated with the Holocaust),
but he did not share their anti-Americanism, nor could he sympathize
with what he saw as their anti-intellectual posture. In January 1969,
following months of student protests, strikes, and sit-ins, a group of
students approached the Institute for Social Research with the intent of
engaging its directors in their initiatives. For some unknown reason,
Adorno panicked and, fearing that the students might damage or destroy
the Institute's premises, called the police and asked them to intervene.
In August 1969, exhausted by several intimidating encounters with
student activists, Adorno decided to vacation in Zermatt in the Swiss
Alps, where, against the advice of doctors, he climbed a 3,000-metre
peak. On reaching the summit, he immediately began experiencing severe
chest pain. At his wife's insistence, he went to the hospital in Visp,
but died that evening.
**Further Reading:** F. Jameson *Late Marxism: Adorno, or, The
Persistence of the Dialectic* (1990).
S. Jarvis *Adorno: A Critical Introduction* (1998).
