---
ID: 28
type: concept
tags: 
 - political philosophy
 - social theory
---

[[anarchism]]

 The word
'anarchy' is derived from the Greek '*anarkhia*', meaning against
authority or, more strongly, acting in the absence of a ruler. Until
1840, when the word was adopted by Pierre-Joseph Proudhon to describe
his political and social ideology, it was generally used in a derogatory
fashion. But Proudhon argued that political organization without rigid
and hierarchical forms of government was both possible and desirable. He
was picking up from where William Godwin (partner of Mary Wollstonecraft
and father of Mary Shelley) had left off in his landmark work *Enquiry Concerning Political Justice* (1793). Proudhon's work was extended and
given a revolutionary character by two Russian intellectuals, Mikhail
Bakunin and Peter Kropotkin, who remain major figures in the field. As
these thinkers defined it, anarchism is anti-hierarchical; it holds that
no single person or group of persons should have power or authority over
another person or group of persons. It is often dismissed as infeasible
or utopian for this reason, but anarchism nonetheless maintains a strong
claim on contemporary political thinking for the way it challenges us to
question the underpinnings of the delegated power structures that obtain
in most nation states today---i.e. why should one elected official such
as a president have so much power to decide on policies and policy
actions affecting the lives of millions of people? The Occupy Wall
Street movement of 2011 is an example of an anarchist-inspired movement
that, in however short-lived a fashion, set out to question the status
quo, and in doing so created the powerful slogan of the 99%.
**Further Reading:** C. Ward *Anarchism: A Very Short Introduction*
(2004).
