---
ID: 33
type: discipline
tags: 
 - continental philosophy
---

[[animal studies]]

 An emerging
interdisciplinary field of study focused on animal--human relations and
interactions broadly understood. The 'animal turn', as it is sometimes
referred to, involves the ethical reflection upon non-human animals,
across disciplines, in contrast to the anthropocentric focus of the
humanities. Drawn from philosophy, animal studies has grown to encompass
work in the social sciences and the humanities. Peter Singer's 1975 book
*Animal Liberation*, which argues for veganism and against the
'speciesism' of privileging humans over animals, is usually viewed as
the foundational text in the field. But it was really John Berger's 1977
essay 'Why Look at Animals?' that set the tone for the field of animal
studies essays by arguing that today we live 'without animals', that
they are either invisible or the source of spectacle. Also important is
[[Derrida, Jacques]]'s 1997
lecture 'The Animal that Therefore I Am', which focuses on interactions
between humans, animals, and language. By overturning the preoccupation
with the human, animal studies challenges us to rethink many questions
central to humanities and social sciences. While the parameters of study
remain fluid, animal studies is a field of exponential growth, with
several scholarly journals and numerous book series devoted to its
research.
[[Annales School]] A
loosely-knit group of French historians associated with the journal
*Annales d'histoire économique et sociale*, which was first published in
1929. Founded by Lucien Febvre and Marc Bloch, a sixteenth-century
specialist and medievalist respectively, the journal was intended to
promote a new kind of history that would shift the focus of
historiography from narrative to analysis, and in doing so give
attention to the full range of human activities, making space for
collaboration with other disciplines (geography, sociology, psychology,
anthropology, linguistics and economics) in order to produce what would
come to be called 'total history'. It dismissed narrowly empirical
approaches to history, or what it called *histoire évenementielle*
(factual history), in favour of a much broader approach, which came to
be codified by [[Braudel, Fernand]] as the
three-tiered model, generally known by the first of its levels the
*longue durée*, which refers to human interaction with the physical
environment and a timescale almost imperceptible to the human eye. It
addressed itself to 'problems' in history---for example, Febvre's *Le Problème de l'incroyance au 16e siècle: la religion de Rabelais* (1942),
translated as *The Problem of Unbelief in the Sixteenth Century* (1983),
attempted to explain why 'unbelief' was impossible in the sixteenth
century. From its rebellious and small beginning, the *Annales* School
rapidly rose to a position of hegemony in the French academy, expanding
enough to fracture back into small rebellious factions all over again.
It is customary to treat the history of the *Annales* School in terms of
generations: the first generation was Bloch and Febvre, but Bloch who
was active in the Resistance during World War II was executed by the
Gestapo in 1944, so it was left to Febvre to keep the movement going;
the second generation was dominated by the towering figure of Febvre's
student, Braudel; the third generation was led by Braudel's students
Jacques Le Goff, Emmanuel le Roy Ladurie, and Marc Ferro. Although never
part of the *Annales* School, historians like [[Certeau, Michel de]], [[Foucault, Michel]] and [[Lefebvre, Henri]] were also
influenced by its approach to history.
**Further Reading:** P. Burke *The French Historical Revolution: The
Annales School* 1929--89 (1990).
