---
ID: 56
type: thinker
tags: 
 - anthropology
 - cultural studies
---

[[Augé, Marc]]
 (1935--)

 A
French anthropologist, Augé belongs to the generation of scholars who
were trained in the 1960s in Paris, for whom the likes of [[Althusser, Louis]], [[Certeau, Michel de]], [[Deleuze, Gilles]] and [[Foucault, Michel]] can be counted as
teachers and crucial influences or antagonists as the case may be. A
prolific, witty, and complex author, Augé considers himself to be an
anthropologist; but his lifelong project has been one of reinventing
what it means to do anthropology in the rapidly changing times he refers
to as [[supermodernity]]
(*surmodernité*).
Marc Augé's career can be divided into three stages, reflecting shifts
in both his geographical focus and theoretical development: early
(African), middle (European) and late (Global). These successive stages
do not involve a broadening of interest or focus as such, but rather the
development of a theoretical apparatus able to meet the demands of the
growing conviction that the local can no longer be understood except as
a part of the complicated global whole.
Augé's career began with a series of extended field trips to West
Africa, where he researched the Alladian peoples situated on the edge of
a large lagoon, west of Abidjan on the Ivory Coast. The culmination of
this endeavour is the masterly *Le Rivage alladian: Organisation et
évolution des villages alladian* (1969) (The Alladian Riparian Peoples:
Organization and Evolution of Alladian Villages). The sequel, *Théorie
des pouvoirs et Idéologie: Études de cas en Côte d'Ivoire* (1975)
(Theory of Powers and Ideology: Case Study in the Ivory Coast), followed
a series of three further field excursions to the Ivory Coast between
1968 and 1971. Augé coined the term ideo-logic to describe his research
object, which he defined as the inner logic of the representations a
society makes of itself to itself. A third and final instalment in this
series of studies of the Alladian peoples was added in 1977, *Pouvoirs de vie, Pouvoirs de mort* (Powers of Life, Powers of Death).
The second or European stage, consists of a sequence of three
interrelated books: *La Traversée du Luxembourg* (1985) (Traversing
Luxembourg Gardens); *Un Ethnologue dans le métro* (1986); translated as
*In the Metro* (2002); and *Domaines et Châteaux* (1989) (Homes and
Palaces). In this period of his career, Augé took the novel approach of
applying methods developed in the course of fieldwork in Africa to his
local Parisian context. Augé focused on four key aspects of contemporary
Parisian society: (i) the paradoxical increase in the intensity of
solitude brought about by the expansion of communications technologies;
(ii) the strange recognition that the other is also an 'I'; (iii) the
[[non-place]], the ambivalent
space that has none of the familiar attributes of place---for instance,
it incites no sense of belonging; (iv) the oblivion and aberration of
memory. The work in this period emphasizes the anthropologist's own
experience in a way that neither the earlier nor later work does. Augé
does this by comparing his own impressions of these places with those
produced by some of French literature's greatest writers. What this
comparison illustrates is the apparent insuperability of the gap between
language and experience. Yet it is that very gap, he argues, that his
anthropology must be able to close if it is to be of continuing
relevance in contemporary society.
The third or global stage has so far yielded four books: *Non-Lieux,
Introduction à une anthropologie de la surmodernité* (1992) translated
as *Non-Places: Introduction to an Anthropology of Supermodernity*
(1995); *Le Sens des autres: Actualité de l'anthropologie* (1994)
translated as *A Sense for the Other: The Timeliness and Relevance of
Anthropology* (1998); *Pour une anthropologie des mondes contemporains*
(1994) translated as *An Anthropology for Contemporaneous Worlds*
(1998); and *La Guerre des rêves: exercises d'ethno-fiction* (1997)
translated as *The War of Dreams: Exercises in Ethno-fiction* (1999).
Taken together these works comprise an extended meditation on the
disparity between observations made in the course of anthropological
fieldwork in the first and the second stages of his career. The third
stage of Augé's career has a twofold aim: on one hand, it is an attempt
to theorize [[globalization]]
as it is lived in properly global terms; on the other hand it is an
attempt to reinvigorate the discipline of anthropology as a whole. To
that end he deploys a number of innovative writing techniques,
describing the synthetic results as 'ethno-novels'. *See also*
[[postmodernism]].
**Further Reading:** I. Buchanan 'Non-Places: Space in the Age of
Supermodernity' in R. Barcan and I. Buchanan (eds.) *Imagining Australian Space* (1999).
J. Frow *Time and Commodity Culture* (1997).
