---
ID: 57
type: concept
tags: 
 - cultural studies
---

[[aura]]

 The intrinsically
unreproducible aspect of a work of art, namely its original presence in
time and space. It is, in effect, the quality of uniqueness that
separates the original from its copy and can be compared to the
specificity to the eye of a particular mountain range or some other
natural wonder. But more than that, it is what cannot be copied,
regardless of technological capacity. [[Benjamin, Walter]] proposed this
term in what is probably his most famous essay, 'Das Kunstwerk im
Zeitalter seiner technischen Reproduzierbarkeit' (1936), translated as
'The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction' (1968), as a
means of explaining his larger thesis that the nature of perception
itself is subject to change in the course of history. New types of
artwork, especially film, came into being at the end of the nineteenth
century, which could no longer be said to be reproductions of originals.
The original in such a context is always already a copy. What Benjamin
wanted to explain is this difference between a painting and a film and
he argued that the aura of the former was no longer to be found in the
latter and therefore the very idea of aura itself was in decay. Although
he doesn't use this term, [[Eco, Umberto]]'s account of
[[postmodernity]], or what he
tends to refer as
[[hyperreality]], is based on
precisely this thesis.
