---
ID: 62
type: concept
tags: 
 - biopolitics
---

[[autoimmunity]]

 A medical term
which has gained currency in contemporary [[critical theory]], especially in the
work of [[Derrida, Jacques]]
and Roberto Esposito, that refers to the paradoxical fact that human and
non-human bodies are capable of perceiving a part of themselves as an
'enemy' requiring an immunity response. A body suffering from an
autoimmune disease---such as multiple sclerosis---literally attacks
itself: one part of the body (i.e. the so-called immune system) tries to
kill another part of the body, as though it somehow did not belong there
or was some kind of foreign invader. Autoimmunity is in this sense a
form of self-defence that has gone wrong. Writing in response to the
events of September 11, 2001, Derrida used this concept to expose one of
the central paradoxes of the modern state, namely its capacity---we
might also say willingness---to destroy one part of itself in order to
save itself. To do so, it represents that which is inside the state as
being something that really is from the outside, or at least ought to be
relocated there. An obvious instance of this would be the treatment of
refugees and asylum seekers, who, no matter whose border they cross, are
always treated as outsiders. The fear generated in response to the
presence of refugees and asylum seekers is, as Esposito argues,
precisely an immune response. But a better analogy would be to think of
the way elected government officials (parliamentarians, senators, and so
on) speak of government (by which they mean government bureaucracy) as
being the key problem they have to deal with. In this situation
government treats itself as an 'other' and attacks itself in order to
preserve itself. Derrida's point is that we cannot fully understand the
self if we do not take into account its constitutive capacity for
self-harm. But more importantly it means we cannot fully understand the
state, including the democratic state, if we do not take into account
its willingness to sacrifice a part of itself for the good of the whole.
*See also* [[bare life]]; [part
who have no part](#X8fc03356f8c4d2511d6d29e73d5970df46e028c).
**Further Reading:** G Borradori (ed) *Philosophy in a Time of Terror:
Dialogues with JÃ¼rgen Habermas and Jacques Derrida* (2003).
