---
ID: 63
type: concept
tags: 
 - systems theory
 - biology
---

[[autopoiesis]]

 The term was
introduced by the evolutionary biologists Humberto Maturana and
Francisco Varela in their groundbreaking book *Autopoiesis and
Cognition: The Realization of the Living* (1972) which set out to
understand the nature and organization of living systems from the
perspective of their unitary character. Maturana and Varela boldly
assume that there is an organization that is common to all living
systems, regardless of their actual component parts, and it is this
abstract system that they set out to define. They also maintain that all
living systems are machines, which they mean in the most literal
sense---i.e. it is a form of organization that can only be explained in
terms of the relations it institutes, not its components. A machine may
be realizable by a variety of different components, a fact that does not
alter its nature as a machine. Similarly, the uses to which a machine
may be put may vary considerably, but do not in any way determine the
nature of the machine. Their approach is purely mechanistic inasmuch as
they will not consider the possibility of forces not found in the
physical universe, but their interest in relations means that their work
is necessarily speculative. Their most important claim is that
autopoiesis is necessary and sufficient to characterize a living
system---i.e. wherever autopoiesis is found there is a living system,
and, vice versa, wherever a living system is found there will be
autopoiesis.
The autopoietic machine has quite distinctive characteristics. To begin
with, autopoietic machines are homeostatic---this means all feedback is
internal to the machine, and, as such, they exist in a balanced state of
constant self-regeneration of their own components. They are not static,
but maintain themselves through a constant process of change.
Autopoietic machines do not have inputs and outputs that are external to
them, although they can be disturbed or disrupted by processes occurring
outside them. Autopoietic machines are also autonomous---all changes
they undergo are for the sole purpose of maintaining themselves.
Autopoietic machines have individuality---their organizational structure
does not vary, even if their specific components do; they are also
topological unities; their operations are boundary-defining; they
reproduce only themselves. For all these reasons, a factory cannot be
considered an autopoietic machine, because its processes of production
are not oriented towards producing components of its own system and its
outputs contribute nothing to the regeneration of the system; similarly,
a crystal cannot be considered an autopoietic machine, because its
processes, again, do not regenerate the components of the system, but
instead convert media of one kind into a different state, and the
process ends when the media are exhausted. The simplest and clearest
example of an autopoietic machine is the cell.
German philosopher [[Luhmann, Niklas]] adapted Maturana
and Varela's thinking in order to produce an account of social systems
as autopoietic machines. *See also*
[[sympoiesis]].
