---
ID: 65
type: concept
tags: 
 - logic
---

[[axiomatic]]
**(*L'axiomatique*)** [[Deleuze, Gilles]] and [[Guattari, FÃ©lix]]'s term for the
capitalist [[mode of production]]. An axiom is a
proposition which cannot be proven true or false and from which one is
able to construct a system of rules. Sport offers plenty of examples of
axioms---for example, rugby is built on the axiom that the ball can
never go forward from the hands, while soccer is built on the axiom that
no player (except the goalkeeper) may touch the ball with their hands.
There is no justification for these rules; they serve only to construct
the necessary conditions for the game. The shape of the pitch, the type
of ball used, the number of players on each side, are also axioms for
the same reason. In contrast, the offside rule both rugby and soccer
have instituted (in different forms of course) is designed to alter the
playing conditions of the game as it is already constructed. You could
remove the offside rule and it wouldn't substantially alter the game, it
would still be rugby or soccer. In *Mille Plateaux* (1980), translated
as *A Thousand Plateaus* (1987), Deleuze and Guattari utilize this logic
to describe the operation of the state as a form of government.
[[globalization]] is probably
the clearest example of what they mean by axiomatic---e.g. the World
Trade Organization enjoins countries to set aside their specific
national agenda and abide by rules that facilitate the profit-making of
corporations.
