---
ID: 528
type: concept
tags: 
 - philosophy
 - sociology
 - political theory
---

[[panopticon]]

 The
eighteenth-century English philosopher Jeremy Bentham coined the term to
describe a model of prison architecture (which he conceived) enabling
what he thought of as a therapeutic form of total surveillance (the
literal meaning of the word). Consisting of a central observation tower
situated inside a circular building where the cells are located in such
a way as to be fully and constantly visible to the guards who because of
their location and the relative play of light are all but invisible to
the prisoners. The design effectively turns the prisoner's space into a
backlit stage where he or she is continuously on show. Bentham reasoned
that this complete lack of privacy would have a remedial effect on
prisoners who would be forced by this means to adopt socially approved
standards of behaviour because they would be unable to escape the
punitive eye of the guards. Owing to this ingenious structure, prisoners
would internalize better standards of behaviour and thereby rehabilitate
themselves for re-entry into society, or so Bentham thought. Its chief
virtue, in Bentham's view, was that it reduced the need for violent
forms of coercion. But for [[Foucault, Michel]], who happened
upon this work in the course of writing *Surveiller et punir: Naissance
de la Prison* (1975), translated as *Discipline and Punish: The Birth of
the Prison* (1977), it was this psychological dimension that was both
its most fascinating and disturbing feature. For Foucault, Bentham's
blueprints, which gave rise to just a handful of actual buildings (the
most famous example being Stateville penitentiary in the US), are
emblematic of an epistemic shift not only in the treatment of prisoners
but more generally in the organizational rationality---what Foucault
would himself later call
[[governmentality]]---of
society as a whole. He used the term panopticism to characterize the
mechanism behind this change which he charted in the transformation of
the spatial disposition of factories, schools, hospitals, army barracks,
and so forth throughout the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries so as to
bring about what he describes as the automatic functioning of power. The
panopticon is in Foucault's view the most perfect and sublime
realization of the principle of
[[discipline]], the
subordination of bodies to machines and their reconfiguration as
machines.
**Further Reading:** M. Foucault *Surveiller et punir: Naissance de la
Prison* (1975), translated as Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the
Prison (1977).
H. Dreyfus and P. Rabinow *Michel Foucault: Beyond Structuralism and
Hermeneutics* (1983).
