---
ID: 535
type: concept
tags: 
 - political theory
 - philosophy
---

[[part who have no part]]
According to [[Rancière, Jacques]], politics only
exists when the so-called natural order of things whereby the powerful
rule over the powerless is interrupted by the institution of a
people---a part---who otherwise have no part in the community as a
whole. The people who form the part that have no part are the
disenfranchised, i.e. the people who have no rights as citizens, and
therefore no means of addressing the wrongs they are made to suffer. In
the twenty-first century the emblematic figure of the part who have no
part is the refugee, the one who has no state to call their own and no
state that is willing to claim them as their own. The refugee is quite
literally a part that has no part in the larger entity we call the
state. But as Rancière argues, we only view things this way because we
hold to an illusory idea that there are only parts of society, that one
must belong to the majority or the minority, to interest groups or
professional bodies, and so on. This view of the composition of society
excludes all those people who do not belong to a part, or who do not
identify with a part. This is why he says politics does not begin until
this way of seeing things is disrupted. And it is only disrupted by the
presupposition of the equality of all people regardless of their origin,
their race, their sex, indeed regardless of any conceivable difference.
