---
ID: 772
type: thinker
tags: 
 - theatre
 - literature
---

[[Weiss, Peter]] 
(1916--82)


German author, artist, and activist. Born near Berlin to a Hungarian
Jewish father and Christian mother, he lived in Bremen and Berlin as a
child, then moved to London to study photography, and after that to
Prague until Germany annexed the Sudetenland in 1938. He fled, first to
Switzerland and then to Sweden, where he remained for the rest of his
life. In the 1940s and 1950s, Weiss divided his time between teaching
art, making experimental films, and writing prose and drama in both
Swedish and German. His first play *Der Turm* (The Tower) was premiered
in 1950, but it was not until the production of *Marat/Sade* in Berlin
in 1964 that Weiss gained a large international audience. The
internationally renowned director Peter Brook staged *Marat/Sade* in New
York the following year and Weiss's reputation as an innovative, highly
political playwright was made. Set in Charenton Asylum, where de Sade
was incarcerated, the play revolves around the attempt by the inmates to
stage a play about the assassination of Jean-Paul Marat (a leading
figure in the French Revolution) under the direction of the Marquis
himself. Exhibiting the influence of both [[Artaud, Antonin]] and [[Brecht, Bertolt]], the play quickly
became a classic and was subsequently and successfully transposed to
cinema with Peter Brook directing. For many though, Weiss's true
masterpiece is his three-volume historical novel *Die Ã„sthetik des
Widerstands* (1975--81), partially translated as *The Aesthetics of
Resistance* (2005), which explores the rise of Nazism in a more overtly
political fashion than Thomas Mann's allegorical *Doktor Faustus*
(1947), translated as *Doctor Faustus* (1948), and also takes in the
Spanish Civil War.
**Further Reading:** R. Cohen *Understanding Peter Weiss* (1993).
F. Jameson *The Modernist Papers* (2008).
