---
ID: 782
type: thinker
tags: 
 - art history
---

[[Wölfflin, Heinrich]]
(1864--1945) Swiss art historian best known for his so-called
'principles of art', which continue to inform art criticism to this day.
He argued that art history should be studied in terms of changes in
styles and the emergence of new forms, rather than in terms of the
biographies and oeuvres of individual artists. Wölfflin studied art and
history at Basel under the great historian Jacob Burckhardt, philosophy
at Berlin University, and art history at Munich, where his father was a
professor. His doctoral thesis *Prolegomena zu einer Psychologie der
Architektur* (1886) applied the nascent science of psychology to
architecture, setting a pattern for his future works, which similarly
tried to understand the effect as well as the affect of artistic works.
Following his graduation in 1886, Wölfflin undertook a two-year study
tour of Italy, after which he wrote *Renaissance und Barock* (1888),
which, inspired by
[[cathexis]]'s *Die Geburt
der Tragödie* (1870--1), The Birth of Tragedy, went a long way towards
rehabilitating the Baroque as an artistic style. He taught at Basel,
Berlin, and Munich. His best known books are *Die Klassische Kunst*
(1898), translated as *Classic Art. An Introduction to the Italian
Renaissance* (1948), and *Kunstgeschichtliche Grundbegriffe* (1915),
translated as *Principles of Art History. The Problem of the Development
of Style in Later Art* (1929).
