---
ID: 290
type: thinker
tags: 
 - african american studies
 - literary theory
 - cultural studies
---

[[Gates, Henry Louis Jr]]
(1950--) American literary critic and historian specializing in
African-American studies. Born in Virginia, Gates completed his
undergraduate degree at Yale, during which time he spent a year
volunteering at a mission hospital in Tanzania. He was then awarded a
Mellon Foundation scholarship (the first African-American ever to be
awarded it) to study for his PhD at Cambridge University. There he met
Nigerian writer and scholar Wole Soyinka (the first African to win the
Nobel Prize for literature), who would become his mentor. He also worked
with [[Williams, Raymond]] and
George Steiner. He returned to the US before completing his dissertation
and has since held appointments at Yale, Cornell, Duke, and Harvard,
where he is the director of the W.E.B. Du Bois Institute for
African-American Research. Gates's career can be viewed as having a
singular purpose pursued by dual means: his purpose is to modify the
western canon so as to accommodate African and African-American voices;
his means of doing this are theoretical and historical. On the one hand,
through works like *The Signifying Monkey* (1989), he has endeavoured to
offer an aesthetic of black writing that articulates its distinctiveness
without at the same time universalizing black experience (as
[[n√©gritude]] is criticized
for doing); on the other hand, he has undertaken a vast rehabilitation
programme (for want of a better term), whereby he has unearthed rare
published and unpublished works by African-American writers, such as our
*Our Nig* by Harriet E. Wilson, which was the first novel written by a
black person in the US, and brought these into the public sphere. This
has been accompanied by the compilation of encyclopedias of black lives
and writings. Gates is a high-profile intellectual who has done a lot of
work on television and written for the mainstream press. He is routinely
identified as one of the most influential African-Americans. Despite his
fame, in 2009 he was arrested in Cambridge, Massachusetts, by a police
officer---who clearly did not recognize him---on suspicion of breaking
and entering his own home near Harvard University. President Obama
responded to his arrest by saying that, although he was not there and
did not know the details, we all know that black and Latino people are
arrested disproportionately in the US. He subsequently said he regretted
his remarks and hoped that it would be a 'teachable moment'. He then
invited Gates and the arresting officer to the White House for a beer to
talk it over.
