[[May â€™68]]

 A series of street
protests that began in a number of universities in Paris but rapidly
spread to incorporate a wide cross section of French society. Some
historians estimate that as many as 10 million people participated in
the mass strikes over the course of several weeks. Known by a variety of
different epithets such as 'the events of May', and the 'long summer',
May '68 was not a single event, but rather a series of events
interlinked by a common theme or purpose, which is difficult to define
but essentially boils down to a nationwide transformation of what
[[Williams, Raymond]] called,
in a different context, the [[structure of feeling]]. For the first time
in French history, workers and students (effectively the future
managerial class, and therefore the class enemies of the workers) united
together to stage their dissatisfaction with the state of French society
and more especially the way it was governed. Whole sections of the
workforce went out on strike, perhaps most notably the rubbish
collectors, with the result that Paris was soon inundated by refuse
piled high on street corners. The police did not know how to respond,
and many peaceful marches became violent, the cobblestones in the older
parts of Paris being turned into handy missiles. The reason these
events, rather than the numerous other protest events that occurred that
year around the world (e.g. 1968 was also the year of the so-called
'Prague Spring'), have such significance for critical theory is not
clear, though in all likelihood it is simply a matter of its happening
at a time when French theory was hegemonic. Consequently, the
reflections of French critical and cultural theorists (e.g. [[Badiou, Alain]], [[Certeau, Michel de]], [[Deleuze, Gilles]], and Raymond Aron)
on their national situation were transformed by an international
readership into thoughts of more universal significance. In particular
they raised the question of whether
[[resistance]] is possible
and if change can be achieved by non-violent means. Interestingly, in
French politics May '68 is often derided as 'nothing', but in such a way
as to confirm that it really was 'something', although no one is ever
quite sure what.
**Further Reading:** K. Ross *May '68 and its Afterlives* (2002).
