---
ID: 472
type: concept
tags: 
 - marxist criticism
 - sociology
 - economics
---

[[mode of production]] 

[[Marx, Karl]]  created this concept
to distinguish between different periods in history according to the
varying ways in which the forces and relations of production were
organized. Forces of production are the tools, machinery, and energy
sources a society is able to put at its disposal, while the relations of
production are the network of social rules regarding the ownership and
the use of the forces of production (this distinction effectively
corresponds to that between [*base and
superstructure](#Xfa8d009e9df691cdf42eca0d1b64a4ff50d8ec0), which Marx
also uses). Marx's thesis is that the composition of the
economy---meaning, the relative forces available in a society and the
distribution of access to those forces---conditions all other aspects of
social life. As the great Marxist archaeologist V. Gordon Childe has
pointed out, for a society to have artists and shamans it must first of
all produce sufficient surplus food to support non-producing members.
The greater the amount of surplus it produces the greater its potential
to focus on addressing wants rather than needs. Thus, for Marx the
essential point of distinction between modes of production is the amount
of surplus it generates and who benefits from that surplus. He
identifies four modes of production, Asiatic, ancient, feudal, and
bourgeoisie, and prophesies a fifth, namely communism. He also speaks of
three prehistorical modes of production corresponding to the Stone,
Bronze, and Iron Ages. In contemporary critical theory, this concept is
used by [[Althusser, Louis]],
and updated by Ernest Mandel, but probably its most widely debated
incarnation is to be found in [[Jameson, Fredric]]'s account of
[[postmodernism]].
