---
ID: 257
type: thinker
tags: 
 - philosophy of science
 - epistemology
---

[[Feyerabend, Paul]] 
(1924--94)


Austrian philosopher of science. Born in Vienna, Feyerabend was drafted
into the *Arbeitsdienst* (Works Service) upon graduation from High
School in 1942. He then volunteered for the army, hoping the war would
be over before he finished his training. But that was not to be and he
was sent to the Eastern Front where he was wounded. After the war he
tried his hand at several things, even working for a time in theatre. He
then went back to school initially studying sociology and history, but
soon switching to physics, before settling finally on philosophy. He
then studied with [[Popper, Karl]] at the London
School of Economics. Feyerabend was employed for most of his life at the
University of California, Berkeley, but he also held a variety of
visiting appointments outside the US Feyerabend's work was notable for
his argument against the accepted position that there is only one form
of science and that the key to scientific progress is the application of
rigorous scientific methods. He shows rather that there are multiple
forms of science, none with a particular claim to privilege and that
progress occurs in an anarchistic fashion, i.e. when rules are broken
rather than adhered to. Feyerabend's principal works include: *Against Method: An Outline of an Anarchistic Theory of Knowledge* (1975);
*Farewell to Reason* (1987); and *Conquest of Abundance* (1999).
**Further Reading:** J. Preston *Feyerabend: Philosophy, Science and
Society* (1997).
