---
ID: 266
type: concept
tags: 
 - sociology
 - management studies
 - history of technology
---

[[Fordism]]

 Named after Henry
Ford, it refers to both a model of production (namely the assembly line)
and a social phenomenon characterized by rising wages and falling
commodity prices. Ford's originality was not that he developed a means
of increasing industrial productivity (something Taylor's scientific
management theories had already demonstrated), but that he used the
increase in productivity he leveraged by these means to reduce the cost
of his cars and make them more widely affordable. He recognized that
mass production was not viable without mass consumption, and that to
have mass consumption he needed to create consumers, which he did by
raising wages well above the standard of the times. Higher wages came at
a price, though: workers were expected to submit themselves completely
to the needs of the assembly-line machine---they had to work at its
constant, relentless pace, performing highly routinized actions that
excluded all possibility of creativity or even skill. Not only that,
they were also expected to comply with Ford's moral code, which centred
on the family and frowned upon all sexual activity outside marriage. He
even sent social workers to visit his employees' families to teach them
how to spend their money wisely. Ultimately, Ford was not just an
industrialist, but a powerful utopianist intent upon creating a new
society. It was this that attracted Italian critic [[Gramsci, Antonio]], who popularized
the term 'Fordism' and gave it its present meaning as a metaphor for a
state-managed but industry-led transformation of society in which high
wages and job security are traded for compliance with the needs of a
mass-production and mass-consumption economy.
**Further Reading:** D. Harvey *The Condition of Postmodernity* (1989).
