[[carnivalesque]]

, a Russian
linguist and literary critic writing in the first half of the twentieth
century, used this term to characterize writing that depicts the
de-stabilization or reversal of power structures, albeit temporarily, as
happens in traditional forms of carnival. Although this may take the
form of writing about, or otherwise representing (in film, painting,
sculpture, etc.), actual or imagined carnivals, for Bakhtin it was
important that the work itself should come to embody the spirit of
carnival too. It can do this, as Bakhtin shows in *Rabelais and his
World* (1968), by mobilizing humour, satire, and grotesquery in all its
forms, but especially if it has to do with the body and bodily
functions. Fran√ßois Rabelais, a French author from the early 1500s, is
regarded by Bakhtin as an almost perfect exponent of carnivalesque
writing. His most famous work *Gargantua and Pantagruel* is a vivid
illustration of Bakhtin's thesis. It shows a world in which
transgressive social behaviour thrives beneath the veneer of social
order, constantly threatening to upend things. Conceived in the dark
days of the great purges and the Second World War, Bakhtin's concept is
often read as a utopian antidote to repressive forms of power everywhere
and a celebration of the possibility for affirmative change, however
transitory in nature. *The Politics and Poetics of Transgression* (1986)
by Peter Stallybrass and Allon White makes a very strong case along
these lines, as does Robert Stam in *Subversive Pleasures: Bakhtin,
Cultural Criticism and Film* (1989). In contrast, however, [[Eagleton, Terry]] argues in his
book on [[Benjamin, Walter]]
that carnival is a licensed or approved form of transgression and
therefore offers nothing more than the mirage of change. *See also*
[[dialogism]];
[[heteroglossia]];
[[polyphony]].
**Further Reading:** K. Clark and M. Holquist *Mikhail Bakhtin* (1984).
M. Holquist *Dialogism* (2002).
D. Lodge *After Bakhtin* (1990).
