[[control society]] [[Deleuze, Gilles]]

's dark vision of
what comes after [[Foucault, Michel]]'s concept of
[[discipline]] and the model
of society it creates (the phrase itself is taken from William S.
Burroughs). According to Deleuze, disciplinary society began in the
early eighteenth century and peaked at the beginning of the twentieth
century (his dates are not exact). Disciplinary society operates by
creating sites of confinement (barracks, office, prison, school, etc.)
and moving people between them. These sites of confinement organize
everything according to a logic of the proper place and time for every
element, thus achieving both a maximum efficiency of production and a
power of production greater than the sum of the component parts. For
example, the disciplined army is a far more deadly force than an
undisciplined militia, as countless counter-revolutionary wars have
demonstrated. Disciplinary society, according to Deleuze, is analogical,
whereas control society is digital. The difference, though, is not
merely a matter of technology---indeed, when Deleuze wrote this essay in
1990, much of the technology we take for granted today (such as the
Internet) was still in its infancy or belonged to the realm of science
fiction. By digital Deleuze means that mechanism of control does not
resemble or derive from the thing controlled, as it does in analogical
modes of discipline. The disciplined soldier has to be drilled
constantly to achieve the ability to perfectly emulate a prescribed set
of bodily dispositions (marching, standing at attention, saluting, and
so on); by contrast, the controlled soldier is a name in a database
whose performance is measured against abstract training criteria. The
real focus of Deleuze's concept, though, is the changing nature of the
capitalist [[mode of production]], and in this
regard many regard his short essay 'Postscript on Control Societies' to
be uncannily prescient. It predicts the rise of what is now known as
'platform capitalism', e.g. Facebook and Uber, which transforms all
workers into self-employed 'entrepreneurs' and pits them against each
other, thus breaking up the old solidarities of class and class
identity.
