---
ID: 371
type: concept
tags: 
 - philosophy
---

[[instrumental reason]] 

[[Horkheimer, Max]] and [[Adorno, Theodor]] 's term for the
social and political shift in priority from ends to means, from worrying
about the larger meaning and purpose behind goals to caring only for the
efficiency with which those goals are achieved. Comparable to [[Weber, Max]]'s concept of
[[rationality]] (economic
rationality being the best known example of this), instrumental reason
refers not only to a rise in what Weber called bureaucratic thinking, it
also refers to a larger trend in philosophy to privilege the objective
at the expense of the subjective. Now, as Horkheimer and Adorno argue in
*Dialektik der Aufkl√§rung* (1944), translated as *Dialectic of
Enlightenment* (1972), the subjective is treated as though it is sheer
representation without any cognitive content, while the objective is
treated as though it is pure cognitive content. This way of thinking,
Horkheimer and Adorno argue, obscures the fact that what we think of as
reason is always the product of a negotiation between the rational and
the irrational, the subjective and the objective, between that which can
be proved empirically and that which cannot. Even more problematically,
by rigorously trying to purge itself of all its subjective elements,
thought winds up producing a mythology in which it remains trapped. The
objective is made to seem equivalent to that which is unchanging,
eternal, universal, effectively placing it on the same plane as a deity.
In his later work on aesthetics, Adorno argues that this process of
expelling the subjective altogether is not yet complete and suggests
that art has continued importance in our society precisely because it
creates a place for the irrational, thus tempering the relentless
pursuit of the rational in every other dimension of contemporary life.
**Further Reading:** S. Jarvis *Adorno: A Critical Introduction* (1998).
