---
ID: 417
type: thinker
tags: 
 - science and technology studies
 - sociology
 - anthropology
---

[[Latour, Bruno]]
 (1947--)


French sociologist of science and technology. One of the most
influential thinkers of the new century, and certainly the most
influential social analyst of science of the past fifty years. His model
of analysis known as [[actor network theory]] or ANT is very widely
used in the social sciences and humanities. Citations of his work number
in the tens of thousands. He studied theology and philosophy as an
undergraduate and wrote his PhD on Charles Péguy. He did military
service in Africa in the early 1970s, where, under the guidance of [[Augé, Marc]], he wrote a study of
industrial relations in Côte d'Ivoire. In 1975, thanks to a Fulbright
fellowship, he was given the opportunity to undertake an ethnography
(working in collaboration with British sociologist Steve Woolgar) of the
Salk Institute in La Jolla, California. The results of this research
were published as *The Laboratory of Life: The Social Construction of
Scientific Facts* (1979). It revolutionized the way science is
perceived. By closely observing actual practice in the laboratory,
Latour and Woolgar showed that science is not a purely objective search
for immutable facts, and that what we consider facts are themselves
social constructions. Latour developed this theme further in two
follow-up works: *Science in Action* (1987) and *The Pasteurization of
France* (1988), both of which offer historical reconstructions of
scientific discoveries---of DNA and microbes respectively---as a way of
understanding the production of scientific knowledge. Latour's argument
in this trilogy of works on science is that science and society are
co-creations: neither could be what it is without the agencies of the
other. This means, as Latour argues in *We Have Never Been Modern*
(1993), that the idea of progress is untenable because it implies that
the one---science---spurs the development of the other---society---or
the other way round, but either way it presupposes the interdependence
of the two. If progress is untenable as an idea, then so must modernity
be: hence the title of the book. Ultimately, one might say Latour's main
project is not so much to change how we understand science as it is to
deconstruct the ideas that we have about the constitution of society. At
the heart of this deconstruction of the notion of society is the model
of thinking known as ANT, which turns on the idea that agency is not
just the province of humans, but can be found in non-humans as well
(which includes both the animate and the inanimate) and is distributed
across an entire network. In this way Latour is able to show that
machines in a laboratory, for example, have just as much influence in
decision-making as humans do, although they exert their influence
differently. In 2013 Latour attempted to pull together all his thinking
about the constitution of society into a quasi-manifesto, *An Inquiry
into Modes of Existence*. In so doing he attempts to transform sociology
into metaphysics.
**Further Reading:** G. de Vries *Bruno Latour* (2016).
G. Harman *Bruno Latour: Reassembling the Political* (2014).
