---
ID: 323
type: concept
tags: 
 - sociology
 - anthropology
---

[[habitus]]

 An acquired but
structuring disposition towards the world constituted in practice (i.e.
as a consequence of actual, practical experience) and always oriented
towards practical situations and problems. The term dates back to
Aristotle---*habitus* is the Latin translation of the Greek word
*hexis*. It was revived for critical usage by the French scholars Marcel
Mauss, working in anthropology, and several years later by [[Merleau-Ponty, Maurice]]. The German
theorist Norbert Elias also used the concept in *Über den Prozess der
Zivilisation* (1939), translated as *The Civilizing Process* (1994). It
was, however, the French sociologist [[Bourdieu, Pierre]], who gave the
concept the prominence it enjoys today. Interestingly, too, it seems he
did not draw on any of these precursors, but rather came across the
concept in Irwin Panofsky's book on Gothic architecture. He developed
the concept to theorize cultural behaviour as simultaneously subjective
and objective. Habitus refers to those aspects of cultural behaviour
such as taste in food or definitions of beauty which appear 'natural'
but are in fact 'learned'. It manifests as '*savoir faire*' ('know‐how')
or more precisely as an understanding of how to 'play the game'---as
Bourdieu points out, in sport, the rules of the game only create the
conditions of possibility, but they do not determine how the game will
actually be played, nor in fact how one will best succeed at the game.
Knowing this---how to succeed in the game---is the practical knowledge
Bourdieu has in mind when he refers to habitus. Crucially, the habitus
is the locus of those actions---which Bourdieu defines as
[[practices]]---which are
performed unthinkingly, without intention or specific goal, save that of
conforming to the demands of the
[[field]], which the subject
has internalized. Bourdieu says habitus is embodied history. It
transmutes the lessons of the past into a kind of 'second nature' that
activates those lessons even as it forgets them. We do not need to
recall when or how we acquired the taste or habit for a certain practice
for that practice to be central to how we think and act in our daily
lives.
**Further Reading:** P. Bourdieu *Le Sens pratique* (1980), translated
as *The Logic of Practice* (1990).
