---
ID: 182
type: concept
tags: 
 - linguistics
 - semiotics
---

[[denotation]]

 and connotation
Two interrelated orders of meaning operating simultaneously in a single
cultural object: the first order, denotation, functions to state 'what
is'; the second order, connotation, functions conceptually and
ideologically. French literary critic [[Barthes, Roland]], who transformed
these concepts into a full-blown semiotic system by adapting the work of
Danish linguist [[Hjelmslev, Louis]], offers an
extended example of how this dual system works in his afterword to
*Mythologies* (1957), translated as *Mythologies* (1970) in the form of
a meditation on the cover page of a random issue of *Paris Match*. The
image in question is of a uniformed black soldier saluting the French
flag---at the level of denotation, the image signifies or can be read as
simply that, a black soldier saluting a flag; but the same image also
offers another order of meaning, or connotation, which Barthes muses
might be that it is an answer to the critique of colonialism (what could
be more patriotic and thus less inclined to insurrection than a soldier
in uniform saluting a flag?). Within that analysis, the same dual
function is clearly at work: the French flag denotes the national flag
of France, but connotes patriotism, belonging, identification, and so
forth. This [[dialectic]]
way of reading cultural texts was especially influential in film and
media studies in the 1970s and 1980s.
