[[drive]].
**Further Reading:** I. Buchanan *Deleuze and Guattari's Anti-Oedipus*
(2008).
[[détournement]]
(**turnaround/reversal**) An artistic practice conceived by the
[[Situationism]] for
transforming artworks by creatively disfiguring them. In 'A User's Guide
to Détournement' (1956), [[Debord, Guy]], a key Situationist
theorist, and Gil Wolman, argue that *détournement* has a double
purpose: on the one hand, it must negate the ideological conditions of
artistic production, the fact that all artworks are ultimately
commodities; but on the other hand, it must negate this negation and
produce something that is politically educative. It achieves negation in
two main ways: either it adds details to existing works, thus revealing
a previously obscured ambiguity, or it cuts up a range of works and
recombines them in new and surprising ways. The enemy of this practice
is, however, sheer novelty, and it is this that must be guarded against
in producing the negation of the negation. The Situationists take the
position that the literary and artistic heritage of humanity should be
used for what they term partisan propaganda purposes, by which they mean
the promotion of radical politics. The advantage of *détournement*,
Debord and Wolman argue, is that it is cheap but powerful and that makes
it a weapon anyone can use to break through what they famously call the
Chinese walls of understanding. Marcel Duchamp's moustache on the *Mona Lisa* is regarded as consistent with this aim, but too tame; similarly,
[[Brecht, Bertolt]]'s
re-staging of classical plays by Shakespeare is regarded as a crucial
prototype, but again it is seen as being too conservative. The *poète
maudit* Lautréamont (pen-name of Paris-based Uruguayan writer Isidore
Ducasse) is generally regarded as the main precursor; his *Les Chants de
Maldoror* (1868) is cited by Debord and others as the perfect example of
an extended *détournement*. The main exponent of the practice of
*détournement* was Danish painter Asger Jorn who, along with Guy Debord,
was one of the founders of the Situationist movement. *See also*
[[cognitive map]];
[[drive]];
[[deterritorialization]];
[[flâneur]].
**Further Reading:** K. Knabb (ed.) *Situationist International
Anthology* (2007).
S. Plant *The Most Radical Gesture: The Situationist International and
After* (1992).
