---
ID: 488
type: concept
tags: 
 - philosophy
 - critical theory
---

[[negative dialectics]]

 A new
form of [[dialectic]]
thinking developed by [[Adorno, Theodor]] in *Negative Dialektik* (1966), translated as *Negative Dialectics* (1973), which
many regard as his magnum opus. Written with the explicit aim of
radicalizing western philosophy as a whole by generating a mode of what
he termed non-identity thinking, *Negative Dialectics* offers a bold
programme for an immanent and self-reflexive critique of philosophy
rather than a specific concept. This programme can be understood as the
attempt to resolve, though not once and for all, two different problems:
first, if concepts are not identical with their objects then in a
certain sense they are inadequate to the task of defining objects;
second, if we are aware of this, but accept that philosophy has no other
resource for understanding and defining objects except the concept, then
we have to figure out how to create an adequate form of philosophy using
means we know to be inadequate. Concepts cannot be identical with
objects by definition. So this isn't simply a problem of a poorly
conceived concept that could be remedied by creating a better concept.
The problem is exacerbated by the fact that both concepts and objects
change over time. Thus, every concept has a history and is embedded
within history. Adorno's solution to this twofold problem is to build a
critique of concepts into his critique of philosophy. Since this is a
working with (rather than a resolving of) the fundamental problem of the
inadequacy of concepts it is described as *negative* dialectics. That is
to say, it is a restless form of thinking which does not proceed from,
or expect to arrive at a transcendental or transcendent ground or
principle. Negative dialectics directs philosophy to confront the
interfaces between concepts, objects, ideas, and the material world.
**Further Reading:** D. Held *Introduction to Critical Theory* (1980).
S. Jarvis *Adorno: A Critical Introduction* (1998).
