[[nomadology]]

[[Deleuze, Gilles]] and Félix
Guattari's utopian project outlined in *Mille Plateaux* (1980),
translated as *A Thousand Plateaus* (1987). The origin of the word
'nomad' is not, as many have assumed, a romanticized image of actual
nomadic peoples, such as the Bedouins, but rather [[Kant, Immanuel]]'s disparaging claim
that the outside of philosophy is a wasteland fit only for nomads. The
immediate origin of the concept would seem to be Deleuze and Guattari's
discussion of the despot in *L'Anti-Œdipe* (1972), translated as
*Anti-Oedipus* (1977). The despot is an intermediate figure between the
primitive society without a state on the one hand and the so-called
civilized imperial state on the other. What is crucial about the concept
of the despot, however, is the fact that in Deleuze and Guattari's
description it refers to a latent state of being, meaning it is virtual
and presupposed, but never actual. Like the despot, then, the figure of
the nomad stands for the power of the virtual, or what they call the
[[war machine]]. The nomad is
a tendency towards
[[deterritorialization]],
Deleuze and Guattari argue, that can be found to some degree in all
phenomena. Their project consists in identifying this tendency wherever
it can be located and finding ways of amplifying it. Deleuze and
Guattari distinguish between a royal science and a nomadic science, and
though they freely admit that nomadic science creates structures that
collapse, they also celebrate its ability---when juxtaposed with royal
science---to open a creative line of flight.
