---
ID: 67
type: concept
tags: 
 - existentialism
---

[[bad faith]] 

(*mauvaise foi*)

** A form of self-deception and avoidance of one's freedom. French
[[existentialism]]
philosophers [[Sartre, Jean-Paul]] and [[Beauvoir, Simone de]] used this term
(in subtly differing ways) to account for what they saw as the
inauthenticity inherent in modern life, by which they meant the
individual subject's failure to grasp the truth of their situation in
[[late capitalism]]. That is
to say, if bad faith can be thought of as a lie to oneself, it should
not be thought of as a form of lying because the liar in this case is
not in possession of the truth. Indeed, as Sartre argues in *L'Étre et
le néant* (1943), translated as *Being and Nothingness* (1958) the real
liar, the one who knows the truth and intends to deceive, does not in
fact act in bad faith at all. The point is that bad faith as Sartre
wants it understood refers to the way one acts with regard to one's own
self and not with regard to others. For Sartre, offering the two by now
'classic' case examples of the waiter and the seduced woman, all social
roles contain within them the demand that we act in bad faith---we can
play the part of the waiter, but we cannot be the waiter in our being;
the seduced woman is constrained from acknowledging both her own desires
and that of her suitor by social conventions. Toril Moi offers a
brilliant feminist critique of this latter argument in her intellectual
biography of Beauvoir: *Simone de Beauvoir: The Making of an
Intellectual Woman* (1994). [[Goffman, Erving]]'s theory of
performance in *The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life* (1959) takes
this situation of a divided consciousness, which for Sartre was what was
problematic about modern life, as the normal condition.
