---
ID: 81
type: thinker
tags: 
 - sociology
 - continental philosophy
---

[[Beck, Ulrich]] 
(1944--2015)


German sociologist best known for developing the concept of [[risk society]]
(*Risikogesellschaft*). Beck was born in Stolp, which is now known as
Slupsk and is in Poland, but was then under German control. His family
fled west after the war and he grew up in Hanover. He studied for his
undergraduate and postgraduate degrees at Munich University, which is
where he obtained his first job as well. In 1979 he moved to MÃ¼nster and
from there to Bamberg in 1981, where he remained for a decade. He
returned to Munich in 1992 and remained there for the rest of his life.
He also held a concurrent position at the London School of Economics.
Beck first came to international attention with the publication of
*Risikogesellschaft: Auf dem Weg in eine andere Moderne* (1986),
translated as *Risk Society: Towards a New Modernity* (1992). Appearing
shortly after the disaster at Chernobyl, *Risk Society* offered an
attractive theory of society rendered vulnerable by its own
technological sophistication. He overturned the idea that new technology
is inherently beneficial to society. Beck's key argument is that
nowadays more decisions affecting daily life are being made in the
sub-political realms of business and bureaucracy, with little or no
political oversight, a fact that threatens the quality if not the
existence of democracy. For instance, the decision to place a road in
one place and not another is a bureaucratic one, entailing minimal input
from the people affected by the decision. Similarly, when music
companies switched from tapes and LPs to CDs, thus rendering obsolete
the older forms of technology, they did so of their own accord, without
input from the millions of people who were affected by the decision. In
more recent work, such as *Was ist Globalisierung?* (1997), translated
as *What is Globalization?* (2000), and *Der kosmopolitische Blick oder:
Krieg ist Frieden* (2004), translated as *The Cosmopolitan Vision*
(2006), Beck has extended this thesis to the state of the entire planet,
giving his theory both an epochal and global dimension. Describing the
present situation as 'second modernity' (a deliberate refusal of the
term postmodernity), which in his view sits alongside 'first modernity',
Beck argues that the potential for a new
[[cosmopolitanism]] can be
seen in twin drivers of the expansion of capital and the relaxing of
territorial borders. He was an enthusiastic proponent of the European
Union, particularly its expansion into former Soviet satellite
countries, which he took to be a sign not only of cosmopolitanism but
also of the decline of the idea of the nation itself. But, as he was
always careful to point out, cosmopolitanism in this form is not free
from the effects of depoliticization he described in *Risk Society*---it
too must confront the fact that business and bureaucracy can impose
changes on society that society itself has no wish to see implemented.
