---
ID: 86
type: thinker
tags: 
 - philosophy
 - continental philosophy
---

[[Bergson, Henri]] 
(1859--1941)


French philosopher of science interested principally in the operations
of consciousness, particularly with regard to time. One of the most
famous and influential writers of his age, he received the Nobel Prize
for literature in 1928. He is acknowledged as an important influence by
writers as diverse as Marcel Proust, Paul Valéry and Charles Péguy, as
well as psychologists like William James (who claimed that like Kant,
Bergson had induced yet another Copernican turn in philosophy), Pierre
Janet and Jean Piaget. The rise of
[[existentialism]] in France
saw his work fall into disfavour only to be revived again by [[Deleuze, Gilles]] who, in his books
on cinema particularly, manages to make what others have perceived as
Bergson's weaknesses appear as strengths.
Born in Paris, to Jewish parents, he studied at the École Normale
Supérieure, where his classmates were Jean Jaurès (anti-war activist and
socialist leader assassinated in 1914) and [[Durkheim, Émile]]. He received his
doctorate in 1889 for a thesis entitled: *Essai sur les données
immédiates de la conscience*, translated as *Time and Free Will: An
Essay on the Immediate Data of Consciousness* (1919), a work that
continues to be studied to this day. For the next decade he taught in
various lycées, including the prestigious Henri IV. In 1900 he was
offered the Chair in Philosophy at the Collège de France, where he
remained until his retirement in 1921. Suffering from acute arthritis,
he had to give up teaching in 1914. This did not prevent him from
joining a diplomatic mission to the US in 1917 in a bid to persuade
America to join the war. After the war he chaired a section of the
League of Nations devoted to international intellectual cooperation.
Bergson's most influential and best known conceptual invention is the
notion of *élan vital* (vital impulse). Ironically, it is used as much
by his detractors to deride his work as it is by his supporters to
explain what is significant about his work. Bergson's so-called vitalism
is in this respect a double-edged sword. The most straightforward way of
thinking about *élan vital* is that it encompasses the gap in
mechanistic explanations of evolution and names those aspects of
evolutionary change scientific theory cannot explain. It could thus be
seen as a virtual power of differentiation, or adaptation to use the
Darwinian term, namely a creative force able to respond to obstacles and
develop creative but 'unthought' solutions. Species development can be
thought then in terms of an arresting or stabilizing of this flow of
creative energy and thus as much a matter of involution as evolution.
This idea has lately caught the attention of [[complexity theory]].
**Further Reading:** G. Deleuze *Bergsonisme* (1965), translated as
Bergsonism (1988).
S. Guerlac *Thinking in Time: An Introduction to Henri Bergson* (2006).
J. Mullarkey *Bergson and Philosophy* (1999).
