[[Brecht, Bertolt]], Hanns
Eisler and Otto Klemperer. He moved back to Switzerland in 1933 (to
escape persecution under the new race laws implemented by the Nazis) and
subsequently to the US where he waited out the war. Interestingly, for
reasons which aren't clear, and unlike many other German exiles from the
same circle, Bloch was not given employment by Horkheimer's Institute
for Social Research, and was forced to live a hand-to-mouth existence
supported by his wife's job as a waitress. After the war he returned to
the now divided Germany and initially lived in the socialist East
Germany, but after falling out with the authorities there he moved to
the West, and spent his remaining years at TÃ¼bingen. It was during his
period in the US that he began but did not complete his magnum opus, for
which he is best known, the three volume colossus *Das Prinzip Hoffnung*
(1959), translated as *The Principle of Hope* (1986). A sprawling work
that takes in virtually every cultural form of its time, *The Principle
of Hope* argues that every historical age contains its own horizon, its
Front over which what he calls the Not-Yet-Conscious spirit of utopia
(or wish for change) flows. Thus even the darkest moments in history are
said to contain elements of 'Vor-Schein' (pre-appearance or shining
ahead), signs which point towards imminent transformation. Translations
of Bloch's work into English have been inexplicably slow in coming,
which has hampered appreciation of his thought in the Anglophone world.
However it is now generally agreed that Bloch is one of the twentieth
century's most important theorists of utopia. He transformed the concept
from a weak idea associated with unfulfillable dreams into a strong
concept connected to the material reality of everyday life.
**Further Reading:** F. Jameson *Marxism and Form* (1971).
