---
ID: 652
type: thinker
tags: 
 - literary theory
 - gender studies
 - queer theory
---

[[Sedgwick, Eve Kosofsky]]
(1950--2009) American literary critic and [[auteur theory]]. In a trilogy of
books published over a decade beginning in the mid-1980s, *Between Men:
English Literature and Male Homosocial Desire* (1985), *Epistemology of
the Closet* (1990), and *Tendencies* (1993), Sedgwick mapped out the
coordinates for what would subsequently become the field of queer
theory. *Between Men* popularized the term 'homosocial', a term that was
scarcely used in public discourse at that time, as a way of talking
about close male relationships in the work of canonical English male
authors such as Dickens and Shakespeare that are homosexual in
everything but name. *Epistemology of the Closet* extended this line of
thought by arguing that western literature cannot be understood unless
that which it seeks to exclude from view and discussion is recognized to
be an ineradicable feature of the landscape. Sedgwick opens the book
with a bold set of seven axioms that have become cornerstones for queer
theory today: (1) people are different from each other; (2) the study of
sex is not co-extensive with the study of gender and anti-homophobic
inquiry is not coextensive with feminist inquiry; (3) we can determine
in an a priori way the degree to which it makes sense (or does not) to
think about gay and lesbian identities together or separately; (4)
nature versus nurture debates take place against a highly unstable
background of fantasies about what nature and nurture mean; (5) the
search for an historical 'paradigm shift' in the treatment of
homosexuality may obscure our understanding of the present reality; (6)
the relation between gay studies and literary studies is tortuous; (7)
the paths of both allo-identification and auto-identification are likely
to be strange and different. *Tendencies* focuses on the structural
incoherence in commonsense understandings of homosexuality. Sedgwick was
diagnosed with breast cancer in 1991. She wrote about the disease and
the way it affected how she thought and felt about life in *A Dialogue
of Love* (1999).
