---
ID: 663
type: concept
tags: 
 - gender studies
 - psychology
 - sociology
---

[[sexuality]]

 When this word
first entered the English language in 1879, it referred to the capacity
of someone to have sexual feelings. It recognizes that one's sexual
feelings are not predestined; the fact of having a body does not
determine how one can or will experience that body. In the nineteenth
century, when the term was first used, its purpose was to medicalize
[[sex]] and shift it from the
realm of religious
[[discourse]] to that of
medical discourse. Disease replaced sin as the principle way apparently
nonconforming (i.e. non-procreative) sexual practices were classified
and understood. When the word 'heterosexual' was first used in 1892, it
described these nonconforming, non-procreative sexual practices and was
therefore used to classify a particular kind of perversion. It was not
until the mid-twentieth century that it gained its present meaning as
the 'standard' model of sexuality that stands in opposition to all other
forms. What is important to note in this change, though, is the way the
terminology shifts from naming specific sexual practices performed by
individuals to classifying those individuals as particular types of
people. In the latter half of the twentieth century this became the
dominant meaning of the notion of sexuality: it identifies a sexual
identity, a way of being in the world. As such, sex has been shifted
from the realm of the biological to that of the
psychological---sexuality is a state of mind in the twenty-first
century. But it is undecided as to whether it is voluntary or
involuntary. There are strong arguments for both views.
