---
ID: 684
type: concept
tags: 
 - biology
 - sociology
---

[[sociobiology]]

 A study of
human and animal behaviour premised on the idea that specific behaviours
can and must confer evolutionary advantage, or else they would not exist
or persist. Behaviour can therefore be understood in terms of natural
selection. Sociobiology makes use of Dutch
[[heteroglossia]] Nikolaas
Tinbergen's four categories of analysis: it analyses the function of
certain behaviours in an evolutionary sense; it asks how those
behaviours evolved; it specifies how these behaviours contribute to the
development of the individual; and finally it tries to determine the
proximate mechanism (anatomy, hormones, etc.). To the sociobiologist,
the protective feeling most parents have towards their children can be
explained logically as the necessary behaviour needed by the species to
sustain itself (human children being comparatively weak and vulnerable,
compared to other animals which are much more able to fend for
themselves); by the same token, the vulnerability of the human child is
seen as an advantage because the longer nurturing time allows for
greater levels of learning to be passed on by parent to child. The
principal champion of the field is Edward O. Wilson, whose bestselling
book *Sociobiology: The New Synthesis* (1975) brought international
attention to the concept. The science, as well as the political
implications of sociobiology, is criticized by the science writers
Stephen Jay Gould and Steven Rose, but defended by Steven Pinker.
