---
ID: 680
type: concept
tags: 
 - art history
 - literature
---

[[socialist realism]]

 The
official, mandated style for all art and literature in the Soviet Union
from 1934 until its collapse in 1991. In Stalin's time, there was a high
degree of scrutiny of all artworks, and artists could be imprisoned or
exiled to Siberia for deviating from the prescribed style. The level of
scrutiny diminished dramatically after his death, but it was not until
the advent of *glasnost* that artists could begin to operate without
being concerned about the opinion of the state. Socialist realism was
born of the idea that the creation of the Soviet Union as not only a new
state, but a new kind of state, required art that would advance its
[[glocalization]] cause and
contribute to its human re-engineering programme (what the Chinese would
later call the 'Cultural Revolution'). Art should, in other words, help
to define and create the so-called 'New Soviet Man'. To this end, then,
it must describe and celebrate the people's historical struggle to
create socialism. Moreover, its subject matter and manner of
construction must be both relevant and comprehensible to the
proletariat; it should focus on aspects of daily life familiar to the
proletariat; it should be realistic in a representational sense; and,
most importantly, it should support the aims of the state. In 1948, this
doctrine was laid out explicitly by Andrei Zhdanov, a senior bureaucrat
in the Soviet government, and as a consequence socialist realism is
sometimes referred to as
[[Zhdanovism]].
Pre-revolutionary art was regarded with suspicion since it was produced
under a bourgeois regime, whose values were at odds with those fostered
by the Soviet Union. Therefore artistic styles that emerged before the
1917 revolutions were discouraged, particularly non-representational
forms (such as abstract art), which were thought too difficult for the
proletariat to comprehend. Socialist realism is derided in the west for
being programmatic---artistic inspiration, it is usually said by western
critics, cannot be willed on command or made to work to rule---and while
that is true to some extent, it nonetheless gave rise to some
magnificent artworks celebrating the [[everyday life]] of the working people.
Socialist realism was the official art of the Soviet Union, but it was
not confined to the Soviet Union or its satellites---authors all over
the world (e.g. Louis Aragon, Johannes Becher, Jaroslav Hasek, and Pablo
Neruda) contributed to its development. The principal exponent of
socialist realism in critical theory is the Marxist literary scholar
[[Lukács, György]].
